JUDY WOODRUFF: Since
her nomination as U.S.
Secretary of Education,
Betsy DeVos has become
one of the more polarizing
figures in the Trump Cabinet,
often over school choice.
But her early tenure marks a big
departure from her predecessors
when it comes to higher
education and student loans.
And that's the focus
of our Making the Grade
conversation tonight.
Jeffrey Brown has more.
JEFFREY BROWN: Late in the Obama
administration, new rules were
established to allow student
borrowers to have their debt
erased if they'd been victims
of fraud by for-profit schools.
But as the new rules were set
to take effect this month,
the new administration called
for a freeze, with Secretary
DeVos saying they were created
in a -- quote -- "muddled
process that's unfair to
students and schools."
Days ago, 18 states and
the District of Columbia
responded to that with
a lawsuit challenging
the Education Department.
The freeze is just one
in a series of moves by
the new administration
that take a different
approach to student loans
from its predecessor.
Anya Kamenetz covers education
for NPR, and joins us now.
So, Anya, first, remind us
the extent of this problem, of
students on the hook with loans
to for-profit colleges
and all the criticisms
of predatory practices.
ANYA KAMENETZ, NPR: So,
for-profit colleges at
their height enrolled
about one in 10 students
nationwide, and they're not just
your old cosmetology school.
These are national and in many
cases online programs that
targeted working families.
Now, without painting the entire
sector with the same brush, we
did see over the last decade
many, many different
actions against for-profit
colleges, accusing them of
predatory and fraudulent
treatment.
And there were two large
colleges that shut down in the
last two years, Corinthian and
ITT Tech, with collectively
tens of thousands of students.
JEFFREY BROWN: All
right, so I mentioned
the Obama administration,
they put in rules to
address the problem, and
they created a so-called
borrower defense.
Explain that.
ANYA KAMENETZ: So, borrower
defense to repayment had been
a law on the books for a while.
And it was sort of a
case-by-case ability or
pathway for a borrower
who had been defrauded
by a college to be able
to escape their loans.
And what happened was,
with tens of thousands of
students affected by the
ITT Tech and Corinthian
shutdown, there was a real
need to clarify and to
simplify that regulation.
And so, after a very
long negotiated public
process, borrower
defense to repayment was
put in place.
And basically what it said
was that students could have
their repayment automated, they
wouldn't have to
apply case by case.
And it included a really
important clause that students
wouldn't have to agree to waive
their rights through
arbitration, so that
when -- you know, many
of these for-profit
colleges had a rule on the
books that when you applied,
you said, we're not -- I'm not
going to sue you and I
agree to arbitration.
And that's something that
borrower defense included as
well, which is pretty important
here.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
so that was supposed to
go into effect on July 1.
Betsy DeVos put that on hold.
What is her argument?
And then, of course, the states
jumped in with a lawsuit.
So what's the counterargument?
ANYA KAMENETZ: So, we should
mention that, in addition to
pressing pause or hitting reset
on borrowed defense
to repayment, which is
like the remedy, Betsy
DeVos also has rolled
back something called gainful
employment, which you might
think of as the prevention.
And gainful employment
also regulates for-profit
colleges and other
career programs based on
the debt-to-income
ratio of their students.
So, with those two in mind, the
lawsuit essentially says that
it's a violation of law for the
Education Department to
unilaterally strike down this
rule after this very, very long
and public negotiation process.
And with the reset button
being hit, what we saw this
week is consumer advocates and
students once again taking to
the podium to testify and talk
about their experiences and
why they believe that these
two rules should stay in place.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, just in
our last minute now, I just
want to expand to more generally
look at the overall
student loan problem.
Where do you see the major
differences and the major
flash points now with
the new administration?
ANYA KAMENETZ: Well, I think we
saw, with Obama taking office
right around the financial
crisis, the creation of
the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, which
became a major watchdog
on behalf of students, and many,
many actions taken against the
for-profit sector, but really
also against student
lenders in general.
There's been a real atmosphere
of, I would say, crackdown
in regulation and consumer
advocacy.
And the tenor has
certainly changed in
terms of the announcements
coming out of the DeVos
administration.
She has hired former for-profit
college students - - sorry --
she has hired former for-profit
college executives to advise
her, as well as putting in
charge of federal student aid
the CEO of a private
student loan company.
She has made a lot of
announcements on behalf
of things that will
save taxpayers money and
lead to less burden on
colleges and universities,
including for-profit colleges.
And so a lot of her statements
really made clear that she
doesn't intend to impose onerous
regulatory burdens
on either for-profit
colleges or other types of
colleges, as well as the
student loan industry as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: Anya Kamenetz
of NPR, thank you very much.
ANYA KAMENETZ:
Thank you, Jeffrey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And thanks
to Jeff and to Anya.